docs: add first pass of actor events and DDO documentation (#11615)
filecoin-project/lotus: documentation/en/actor-events-api.md

    # network re-org in that case, the event should be considered as reverted as well.
    reverted Bool        
    height ChainEpoch    # Height of the tipset that contained the message that produced this event.
    tipsetCid &Any       # CID of the tipset that contained the message that produced this event.
    msgCid &Any          # CID of message that produced this event.
}

type EventEntry struct {
    flags Int   # A bitmap conveying metadata or hints about this entry.
    key String  # The key of this entry.
    codec Int   # The value's IPLD codec.
    value Bytes # The value of this entry as a byte string, encoded with 'codec'.
}
```

A `flags` field is used to convey metadata or hints about the entry, currently this is used to provide an indication of the suitability of that field for indexing when stored or when used for querying.

* A `flag` of `0x00` indicates that neither the key nor value are suitable for indexing.
* A `flag` of `0x01` indicates that the key only is suitable for indexing.
* A `flag` of `0x02` indicates that the value is suitable for indexing.
* A `flag` of `0x03` indicates that both the key and value are suitable for indexing.

> Suitability for indexing is a hint, and will typically indicate the uniqueness of the content. For example if a value has an arbitrary number, such as a `piece-size`, it's unlikely to be suitable for building an index for. However, if a field such as a `"provider"` contains an actor ID, it is likely to be suitable for indexing because queries may be made for all events from a particular actor.

Reviewer: I think the logic here is a bit off, and carries some incorrect assumptions. It's not the uniqueness/repetitiveness of a value that determines whether an index is appropriate or not, but rather its queriability. One can perfectly build an index for high variability or unique data, DBMS do this all the time. But our query APIs only offer equality predicates today, so that's what influences what we chose to tag as indexed, eg makes sense to index a CID, but it makes sense to index an arbitrary size. If we exposed gt, lt, etc predicates in queries, indexing the latter would become more worthwhile.

Author: @raulk OK, good input, but can you suggest new wording here please to reflect that?

```suggestion
Suitability for indexing is a hint, and will typically indicate the queriability content.
```

That's about the best I have once you boil it down. From a _user_ perspective, what do we have to say about this field? We're not even using it internally and so far have no plans to. If we can imagine users relying on it, how do we describe it? Maybe leave it simple and move on.

Author: I integrated this into the sentence above the flags description since it already says something similar. I removed this paragraph entirely.

# Actor Events and Lotus APIs

* [Background](#background)
* [ActorEvent structure](#actorevent-structure)
* [Querying Lotus for ActorEvents](#querying-lotus-for-actorevents)
* [Retrieving events from message receipts](#retrieving-events-from-message-receipts)
* [Current builtin actor event schemas](#current-builtin-actor-event-schemas)
  * [Verified registry actor events](#verified-registry-actor-events)
    * [Verifier balance](#verifier-balance)
    * [Allocation](#allocation)
    * [Allocation removed](#allocation-removed)
    * [Claim](#claim)
    * [Claim updated](#claim-updated)
    * [Claim removed](#claim-removed)
  * [Market actor events](#market-actor-events)
    * [Deal published](#deal-published)
    * [Deal activated](#deal-activated)
    * [Deal terminated](#deal-terminated)
    * [Deal completed](#deal-completed)
  * [Miner actor events](#miner-actor-events)
    * [Sector precommitted](#sector-precommitted)
    * [Sector activated](#sector-activated)
    * [Sector updated](#sector-updated)
    * [Sector terminated](#sector-terminated)

## Background

> Actor events are a fire-and-forget mechanism for actors in Filecoin to signal events that occur during execution of their methods to external observers. The events themselves are not stored on chain, but are emitted by the actor and may be stored in a node's event store. They are intended to be used by tooling and applications that need to observe and react to events that occur within the chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Actor events are a fire-and-forget mechanism for actors in Filecoin to signal events that occur during execution of their methods to external observers. The events themselves are not stored on chain (in state), but are emitted by the actor and may be stored in a node's event store. They are intended to be used by tooling and applications that need to observe and react to events that occur within the chain.
```

Author: bit more complicated than that, I've adjusted this para to read:

Actor events are a fire-and-forget mechanism for actors in Filecoin to signal events that occur during execution of their methods to external observers. Actor events are intended to be used by tooling and applications that need to observe and react to events that occur within the chain. The events themselves are not stored in chain state, although a root CID for an array (AMT) of all events emitted for a single message is recorded on message receipts, which are themselves referenced as an array (AMT) in the `ParentMessageReceipts` in each `BlockHeader` of a tipset. A node may optionally retain historical events for querying, but this is not guaranteed and not essential as it does not affect the chain state.

> The FEVM already has this capability and these events for builtin actors have been added to support a range of new features, starting at network version 22 with a focus on some information gaps for consumers of data onboarding metrics due to the introduction of Direct Data Onboarding (DDO), plus some additional events related to data onboarding, deal lifecycles, sector lifecycles, and DataCap activity. Additional events are expected to be added in the future to support other features and use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The FVM already has this capability and these events for builtin actors have been added to support a range of new features, starting at network version 22 with a focus on some information gaps for consumers of data onboarding metrics due to the introduction of Direct Data Onboarding (DDO), plus some additional events related to data onboarding, deal lifecycles, sector lifecycles, and DataCap activity. Additional events are expected to be added in the future to support other features and use cases.
```

> Builtin actor events share basic similarities to the existing events emitted by the FEVM, but are structured differently to reflect Filecoin-specific concerns. There are also new APIs in Lotus to support querying for these events that bear some similarities to the existing FEVM `Eth*` APIs for querying events but are unique to builtin actors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Built-in actor events share basic similarities to the existing events emitted by FEVM-based user actors but are structured differently to reflect Filecoin-specific concerns. There are also new APIs in Lotus to support querying for these events that bear some similarities to the existing FEVM `Eth*` APIs for querying events but are unique to builtin actors.
```

Reviewer 2: > but are unique to builtin actors.

is this true now that we went for the generic approach with GetActorEvents & SubscribeActorEvents -> which supports *both* builtin actors and user smart contract events?

Author: yeah, revisiting some of this with fresh, and more informed eyes, I see a bunch of stuff that's not _quite_ right. Have reworked this para and some other stuff around it

## ActorEvent structure

> Introduced in [FIP-0049](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0049.md), events use a structured logging style of composition, containing a list of entries that define properties of the event. The log entries are described below as `EventEntry` and have the same schema for FEVM and builtin actor events. `ActorEvent` is specifically for representing builtin actor events and includes the list of entries, the actor that emitted the event, and some metadata about the event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduced in [FIP-0049](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0049.md), events use a structured logging style of composition, containing a list of entries that define properties of the event. The log entries are described below as `EventEntry` and have the same schema for user deployed and builtin actor events. `ActorEvent` is specifically for representing builtin actor events and includes the list of entries, the actor that emitted the event, and some metadata about the event.
```

Suitability for indexing is a hint, and will typically indicate the uniqueness of the content. For example if a value has an arbitrary number, such as a `piece-size`, it's unlikely to be suitable for building an index for. However, if a field such as a `"provider"` contains an actor ID, it is likely to be suitable for indexing because queries may be made for all events from a particular actor.

Typically events contain entires that use either use `0x01` or `0x03` flags.

The structured logging style of composition should be seen in contrast to an alternative representation as a plain map or struct where the keys represent the fields of the event and the values represent the values of those fields. Some entries may duplicate keys, in which case that particular field of the event could be represented as an array. Builtin actor events are sufficiently well defined that translation to such a format is possible, but left up to the user.

## Querying Lotus for ActorEvents

Two Lotus APIs are provided that can be used to obtain direct access to events stored on the node being queried (a node may not have all historical events stored and available for query):

> _TODO: update links_

Reviewer 3: What is blocking us from updating the links?

Author: 1. I wanted to check whether these docs are published anywhere else or if pointing into the repo is appropriate
2. These aren't in `master` yet, I'm hessitant to point a link to something that's not merged. It's on feat/nv22 and I don't know the timeframe for merging that.

Could update it now, but the links won't work till it's all landed.

Author: bumped to `master` even though they're not there .. they _will_ be

An example `fields`  with a single matcher would look like: `"fields": { "abc": [{ "codec": 81, "value": "ZGRhdGE=" }]}` where the key being matched is `abc`  with the CBOR codec (`0x51` = `81`) and value is the unicode string `data` encoded as CBOR (then encoded in Base64 to supply to the filter).
- `tipsetCid`  matches a particular TipSet. If this is provided, both `fromBlock`  and `toBlock`  will be ignored.

Described as an [IPLD Schema](https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/), the event filter is:

```ipldsch
type EventFilter struct {
  fromEpoch optional String
  toEpoch optional String
  addresses optional [Address]
  fields optional {String:[ActorEventValue]}
  tipsetCid optional &Any
}

type Address string # Address of an actor

type ActorEventValue struct {
  codec Int   # typically the CBOR codec (0x51)
  value Bytes # typically the CBOR encoded value
}
```

## Retrieving events from message receipts

> The Lotus API `ChainGetEvents` can be used to retrieve events given an event root CID. This CID is attached to the message receipt that generated the events. The `StateSearchMsg` API can be used to retrieve the message receipt given a message CID, the receipt contains the `EventsRoot` CID. The events returned from `ChainGetEvents` contain roughly the same information as the `ActorEvent` structure, including the `EventEntry` log array.

Reviewer 2: TIL this exists
